---
comment_id: 5574981207
is_spam: false
is_deleted: false
post: /en/no-monads/
date: 2021-10-18T05:19:47Z
author_fullname: 'Ed'
author_nickname: 'disqus_M6sHDIh4Mb'
author_is_anon: false
---

<p>"The main reason people turn to monads is, they’ve got lack of knowledge of using exceptions"<br>Most people who use monads are people who have used exceptions and don't like them, and the reason people don't like exceptions is because as you said "I know this is just an extended version of the GOTO operator". yes, and GOTO sucks for reasons that you probably know, but then you say "It looks completely imperative but I don’t care. This is a business problem, not a Haskell tutorial." What does that even mean? So you're OK with with unclear code and execution paths?</p><p>The main problem people have with exceptions is that it makes your code unpredictable.<br>Sure, it's easy to wrap everything in a try/catch and do the error handling at the bottom. You probably save some time, but that will lead to a codebase where the norm isn't to handle errors on the spot, but to simple defer their handling for later.</p><p>Programmers like exceptions because it allows them to segregate their error-handling code from their happy-path code, but the problem is that error handling code shouldn't be treated as "exceptions". Errors happen all the time and good software should handle as many of them as possible. Exceptions train programmers into thinking that error-handling is some kind of afterthought, but things like monads force programmers to handle errors on the spot.</p><p>Another example is golang. It doesn't have exceptions. Although it doesn't force programmers to do this, the convention is to return an error as the last return value and force users to write <code>if err != nil</code> every time because that's how good software is written.</p>
