---
comment_id: 1668045620480
is_spam: false
is_deleted: false
post: /design-dropbox/
date: 2022-11-10 02:00:21 +0000
author_fullname: 'Eric Jones'
---

Hey, my name’s Eric and for just a second, imagine this…

- Someone does a search and winds up at grishaev.me.

- They hang out for a minute to check it out.  “I’m interested… but… maybe…”

- And then they hit the back button and check out the other search results instead. 

- Bottom line – you got an eyeball, but nothing else to show for it.

- There they go.

This isn’t really your fault – it happens a LOT – studies show 7 out of 10 visitors to any site disappear without leaving a trace.

But you CAN fix that.

Talk With Web Visitor is a software widget that’s works on your site, ready to capture any visitor’s Name, Email address and Phone Number.  It lets you know right then and there – enabling you to call that lead while they’re literally looking over your site.

CLICK HERE https://boostleadgeneration.com to try out a Live Demo with Talk With Web Visitor now to see exactly how it works.

Time is money when it comes to connecting with leads – the difference between contacting someone within 5 minutes versus 30 minutes later can be huge – like 100 times better!

Plus, now that you have their phone number, with our new SMS Text With Lead feature you can automatically start a text (SMS) conversation… so even if you don’t close a deal then, you can follow up with text messages for new offers, content links, even just “how you doing?” notes to build a relationship.

Strong stuff.

CLICK HERE https://boostleadgeneration.com to discover what Talk With Web Visitor can do for your business.

You could be converting up to 100X more leads today!

Eric
PS: Talk With Web Visitor offers a FREE 14 days trial – and it even includes International Long Distance Calling. 
You have customers waiting to talk with you right now… don’t keep them waiting. 
CLICK HERE https://boostleadgeneration.com to try Talk With Web Visitor now.

If you'd like to unsubscribe click here http://boostleadgeneration.com/unsubscribe.aspx?d=grishaev.me

