---
comment_id: 1702145337292
is_spam: false
is_deleted: false
post: /en/ddd-lie
date: 2023-12-09 18:08:57 +0000
author_fullname: 'habrewning'
---

Honestly, I must say, that I like your DDD solution more than your coded
solution. I would say, this is well engineered. You give the user a perfect
language, that allows her to express what she needs. I would not use vectors and
keywords for all this, but lists and symbols and with a macro convert them into
something else.

But I would say that your coded version is still data oriented, because you
store it in an EDN file and load it (probably at runtime).

So to me there is no real difference. Both options are good. Maybe when working
with Clojure everything is automatically data oriented. Because it is functional
programming, where functions are the same as data. You work with functions like
with data. And you can use a function inside an EDN file.

It is good that you have both options. In other languages you don't have either
option and you are forced to use things like xml. Yes, that is nothing new, but
still good.

When seeing your first `def RULES` with the code inside, you can alternatively
write

```clojure
(ctx-condition
     (or (and (-> ctx :foo (= :something))
              (-> ctx :bar (= 42)))
         (some-complex-check ctx)...
```

and introduce the `fn [ctx]` part with a macro. Is it now DDD or not? It does
not matter. Code is data. It looks like you complain about something, which you
also practice every day without paying much attention.

But you are right, everything is hard to debug. But the end user does not care
how the developer does the debugging.
