---
comment_id: 1701352973124
is_spam: false
is_deleted: false
post: /feedback/
date: 2023-11-30 14:02:53 +0000
author_fullname: 'Michael Sinclair'
---

Hello,
  
I was looking at your site and wanted to ask if you would be interested in getting two-hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) emails sent out within 48 hours for just $48 - we call it our 48-Special.
 
I’m with HiveMailers, we use a robust email system to get clients daily leads and/or sales 24/7.
 
WE DO ALL THE WORK:

- We create the content for the email(s).
- We provide the email list (contacts).
- We forward leads to you daily.
- We manage your email campaigns 24/7.
- We make changes to the list and content until we get results.

WHO THIS IS FOR:

- Companies who offer products/services to businesses (B2B).
- Companies who provide a product/service with wide appeal (not a small niche).
- Companies who product/service can be sold across the USA and/or international.

Just imagine, getting hot leads within days of getting started with us. 

You might be wondering if our system works, well if you are reading this message, it works. 

Get started now!!!!! We will send out two-hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) emails for just $48.

Take action today and let’s get you some leads. This offer is good for the first 20 clients, don’t miss out.

Simply book a time to talk on our calendar: https://bit.ly/hivemailer-special 

NOTE: To buy an email list and hire an in-house email manager to run your campaign (like our system) would cost around $3,500 a month, but with us, you pay just $48. So, you save over $3,450.

Sincerely,

Michael
HiveMailers

Calendar: https://bit.ly/hivemailer-special 

