---
comment_id: 1700436604224
is_spam: false
is_deleted: false
post: /feedback/
date: 2023-11-19 23:30:04 +0000
author_fullname: 'Theresa Smith'
---

Hello,

I work for Elebands. 

We make ultra-thin, fashionable, all day wearable body weight bands that you put on your wrist, ankle & waist all day to burn up to 1,500 calories, and the best part is, we have bands for sports, casual and formal, so you can wear them with any outfit and look fashionable. 

The problem that most people face, is a tug of war between working out or putting more time in at work, and the worst thing is, most people choose work, and that is why the mortality rate today is so high for executives and the working class. 

That is why we are so excited to solve this problem with our ultra-thin, fashionable, all day wearable body weight bands that allow you to lose weight and get fit no matter where you are and no matter what you are doing.

Benefits You’ll Get Instantly:
 You’ll burn up to 1,500 calories a day as your body gets more toned.
 You’ll start losing weight the natural way without having to workout.
 You’ll start building more muscles and strength as you just go about your day.

Imagine getting the body you always wanted, without having to workout at a gym or having to go on a stressful diet. Well now you can, with Elebands. 

Many of our clients are losing 2-3 pounds a week and getting tremendous health benefits.

Use this coupon code to get 20% off:  SAVE-20%-TODAY

Visit our site now and get the body you always wanted: https://bit.ly/elebands 

Theresa Smith
Brand Ambassador 
Elebands USA

GET STARTED NOW: https://bit.ly/elebands 

