---
comment_id: 1684248054356
is_spam: false
is_deleted: false
post: /feedback/
date: 2023-05-16 14:40:54 +0000
author_fullname: 'Richelle Hoskins'
---

We have hacked your website grishaev.me and extracted your databases. This was due to the security holes you had in your your site/server which have gained us remote control of everything that was on the server. 

Our team is mostly interested in customer, administrative, and employee information which we have extracted through your databases once we got remote control over the server. It still needs to be sorted out but it will be well-organized once finished. First, we will be going through the emails/sms information and contacting the recipient how you held in disregard about their information being exposed to a hacking group when you could have stopped it. This would be detrimental to your personal image with these relationships with these people. Lastly, now that we have information not only will we be monetizing off it with our methods but made public or sold to other people that will do whatever they wish with the information also after we are done.

Now you can put a stop to this by paying a $3000 fee (0.11 BTC) in bitcoin. You can find our address by visiting https://blockchair.com/bitcoin/address/31o29SdN5c5fpPuy4WvHzkyT37RHUSA36Q where you can copy and paste the address or scan the QR code. We will be notified of payment which we will then delete the information we have obtained, patch the hole in the site/server which we got in and remove you from any future targeting in the future. You have 72 hours in doing so after viewing this message or the series of steps will commence. You can obtain bitcoin through such services such as paxful.com or do a search on bing.com
