---
comment_id: 1690238082194
is_spam: false
is_deleted: false
post: /en/no-monads/
date: 2023-07-24 22:34:42 +0000
author_fullname: 'Haskeller'
---

People just don't get what monads are, and they cargo cult them and bring the monadic interface into dynamically-typed languages where a macro would probably do a better job.

Concept #1: Functor

A functor lifts something into a new category (set, if you'd like), while preserving structure of the arrows (functions) of that something.

That is to say, in Haskell, functors lift a value/type into a new value/type, and provide the accessor function fmap that lets you map a function into the new type.

The mathematical requirements for a Haskell functor to be a functor simply come down to:

must be able to lift onto a type
fmap must exist
compose of fmaps over functions is equal to fmapping the compose of the functions
fmapping the identity function is the same as directly applying the identity function

i.e, in math terms, it respects the composition of functions within a category, and in computer science terms, the compiler can do some nice optimizations provided the functor laws hold.

To be a monad:

Monads add two further operations, join / mu / flatten, which compresses two functor layers of the same functor together, and pure / eta / new, which injects a value into a neutral functor layer such that when join is applied to it, it's as though it were never there in the first place.

Join / mu / flatten is also associative; if you have a multiply nested functor and join multiple times, it doesn't matter which two functorial layers get flattened first, as long as you don't swap the order of nesting.

***

If this sounds useless or trivial, well, flatmapping (bind, chain, composition of fmap and join/mu/flatten) monads is a concept of sequencing (produce new monadic context, merge the contexts), and can be used to provide a mathematical description of tons of imperative or imperative-like actions.

The deal, though, is that, in languages with tons of monadic types (Haskell, in Haskell, State, Environment, Write-Only State, List, Array, Optional, Exception, etc... Scala), including monadic types for exceptions and so on, it's convenient to have a proper concept of monad and provide a first-class monadic interface.

You can also have tons of monadic types (Rust), but have distinct interfaces for each monadic type, and that has its benefits.

But unless you're using a ton of monadic types in your language, you don't need a monadic interface.

Clojure doesn't use monadic types; it sticks to straight exceptions much of the time (Haskell also has exceptions, but the problem with its exceptions is that only the impure / IO layer can process the exception thrown). Hell, it's dynamically typed with a glue-on gradual typing type-checker, so it doesn't make sense for Clojure to go with monadic types.

Many Haskellers themselves aren't really interested in monads these days because monads as effect providers tend to have difficulty composing, and when they do compose via monad transformer stacks, there's usually a substantial performance penalty.

So why stuff a questionable feature of Haskell into your language? It's just cargo-culting.
