---
comment_id: 1716144277601
is_spam: false
is_deleted: false
post: /feedback/
date: 2024-05-19 18:44:37 +0000
author_fullname: 'Theresa Smith'
---

Hello,

Do you struggle with the choice of chilling out, working more hours, or going to the gym?

No need to choose anymore, we have the perfect solution for you - EleBands! 

EleBands offers ultra-thin, fashionable all day wearable body weight bands that seamlessly integrate into your daily routine. Burn up to 1,500 calories a day by simply wearing our bands on your wrist, ankle, and waist while you go about your normal day. 

This week, we are giving 20% off to the first 20 customers. 

 Lose Weight 
 Build Strength
 Tone Body
 Look And Feel Great

THEY LOOK HOT!! SEE FOR YOURSELF: https://bit.ly/elebands-news
 
***Get 20% OFF with this coupon code: 20%OFF

Imagine achieving your dream body by just going about your day. With EleBands, it's possible.

Many of our clients are losing 2-3 pounds per week while experiencing significant health improvements. Plus, our clients tell us they receive compliments all the time when they wear thier EleBands. 

People from all walks of life, including top athletes, celebrites and fitness enthusiast love our bands and we are confident you will love them to.  

Beautiful Bands To Choose From: 

 We have multiple colors and 10 styles to choose from. 
 We have sets from 3lb to 30lbs to meet a range of fitness goals.

THEY LOOK SO GOOD!! SEE FOR YOURSELF: https://bit.ly/elebands-news

***Get 20% OFF with this coupon code: 20%OFF

Theresa Smith
