---
comment_id: 1705942543817
is_spam: false
is_deleted: false
post: /feedback/
date: 2024-01-22 16:55:44 +0000
author_fullname: 'Michael Sinclair'
---

Hello,

I checked out your business today and wanted to know if you would be open to the opportunity to reach out to a staggering 1.25 million potential clients on a weekly basis through our highly effective email marketing campaign that can start getting you leads in just a few days? And the best part? It's available to you at an incredibly affordable rate of just $240 per week! 

Plus, as a bonus, we provide the B2B prospect list so you can effortlessly expand your reach weekly and generate consistent leads and sales. 
  
I’m with HiveMailers, we use a robust email system to get clients daily leads and/or sales 24/7.
 
WE DO ALL THE WORK:

- We create the content for the email(s).
- We provide the email list (contacts).
- We forward leads to you daily.
- We manage your email campaigns 24/7.

WHO THIS IS FOR:

- Companies who sell to businesses (B2B).
- Companies who provide a product/service with wide appeal (not a small niche).
- Companies whose product/service can be sold across the USA and/or international.

Just imagine, getting hot leads within days of getting started with us. 

You might be wondering if our system works, well if you are reading this message, it works. 

Get started now!!! For just $240 a week, we’ll send 1.25-Million emails weekly and start filling your inbox with qualified leads. 

Book a 10 min call with us: https://bit.ly/hivemailer-240-special 

NOTE: To buy an email list and hire an email manager to run your campaign (like our system) would cost around $3,500 a month, but with us, you pay just $240 a week. So, you save over $2,000 a month.

Sincerely,
Michael

P.S. This offer is good for the first 20 clients, don’t miss out.  Book appointment now and start getting leads within a few days: https://bit.ly/hivemailer-240-special 


