---
comment_id: 1775115766211
is_spam: false
is_deleted: false
post: /steal-design/
date: 2026-04-02 07:42:46 +0000
author_fullname: 'Eric Jones'
---

Hello Grishaev Me Owner,

My name is Eric and I’m betting you’d like your website Grishaev Me to generate more leads.

Here’s how:

Web Visitors Into Leads is a software widget that works on your site, ready to capture any visitor’s Name, Email address, and Phone Number. It signals you as soon as they say they’re interested – so that you can talk to that lead while they’re still there at Grishaev Me.

Visit https://blastleadgeneration.com to try out a Live Demo with Web Visitors Into Leads now to see exactly how it works and even give it a try… it could be huge for your business.

Plus, now that you’ve got their phone number, with our new SMS Text With Lead feature, you can automatically start a text (SMS) conversation quickly… which is so powerful because connecting with someone within the first 5 minutes is 100 times more effective than waiting 30 minutes or more later.

The new text messaging feature lets you follow up regularly with new offers, content links, even just how are you doing? notes to build a relationship.

Everything I’ve just described is extremely simple to implement, cost-effective, and profitable.

Visit https://blastleadgeneration.com to discover what Web Visitors Into Leads can do for your business, potentially converting up to 100 times more eyeballs into leads today!

Eric

PS: Studies show that 70% of a site’s visitors disappear and are gone forever after just a moment. Don’t keep losing them.
Web Visitors Into Leads offers a complimentary 14-day trial – and it even includes International Long Distance Calling.
You have customers waiting to talk with you right now… don’t keep them waiting.
Visit https://blastleadgeneration.com to try Web Visitors Into Leads now.

If you'd like to Want to receive fewer emails, or none whatsoever? Update your email preferences by visiting https://blastleadgeneration.com/unsubscribe.aspx?d=grishaev.me
