---
layout: post
title:  "Do's and Don'ts"
permalink: /en/dos-and-donts/
tags: english dos-and-donts
lang: en
---

Here is a short list of rules I try to follow when working:

### Database

- Avoid using nullable fields in your DB. Put `not null` everywhere you can when
  defining a table. Assign a default blank value if submitting a field is not
  necessary:

  ~~~sql
  create table foo (
    ...
    comment text not null default '',
    count integer not null default 0
  );
  ~~~

- Keep your database migrations in raw `*.sql` files. Wrap each migration into
  transaction explicitly putting `begin;` and at the top of file and `commit;`
  at the bottom:

  ~~~sql
  --
  -- A short comment about what this migration does.
  --
  begin;

  update foo set bar = 42 where id = 100500;

  alter table baz drop column test;

  commit;
  ~~~

- Don't delete anything from your DB. Add `deleted` boolean flag that is false
  by default and put `AND NOT mytable.deleted` in `WHERE` or `JOIN` statements:

  ~~~sql
  select * from foo where not deleted;
  ~~~

  ~~~sql
  select *.f, *.b
  from foo f
  left join bar b on foo.bar_id = b.id and not b.deleted;
  ~~~

- For each table, add `created_at` that fixates creation time automatically:

  ~~~sql
  create table foo (
    ...
    created_at timestamp not null default current_timestamp;
  );
  ~~~

- Once you've got any geographical data (locations, areas, routes), install
  PostGIS extension without inventing your own "smart" algorithms. They will let
  you down one Friday evening.

- Postgres is great for full-text searching. Try to deal with standard
  PostgreSQL capabilities before installing Elastic, Sphinx and related stuff.

- Avoid using ORMs. A small wrapper that parses `*.sql` files and creates plain
  functions would be enough.

- Don't use triggers to implement business logic. Such behaviour is quite
  implicit and difficult to maintain. And business rules change all the time.

### Code

- Don't align you code with spaces like it's shown below. Use one space only.

  ~~~python
  foo = {
    "short":              1,
    "a-bit-longer":       2,
    "very-very-long-one": 3,
  }
  ~~~

- Write unit tests for both server and UI sides immediately once you've started
  a new project.

- Classes are not data. Prefer plain data structures like lists and maps over
  classes. Usually, structures are fast and covers the most of requirements.

- Try to follow functional approach when develop a program. Avoid keeping state
  where it can be skipped. Separate IO from code that does pure calculations.

### Frontend

- Don't use vanilla Javascript. Use such modern technologies as ClojureScript,
  TypeScrip or Elm to develop without pain in the ass. Consider JS as necessary
  evil running under the hood to ship your application.

- Don't make SAPs (single page applications). Usually they work poorly, the
  layout leaks, you cannot open a link in a new window and they break W3C
  standards.

- Even with Javascript turned off, your client must see important information on
  their screen.

- Don't make you own widgets to substitute standard ones (inputs, drop-downs,
  etc).

- Never interrupt a user with alerts, pop-ups, splashes.

- Never claim on Ad-Block enabled. It's so ridiculous. It's users choice what
  software to use when browsing the Internet.

### Architecture

- Don't make micro-services. Try to keep the whole codebase within. Run
  different domains of your application in separate threads as components.

- Queues might help a lot. Don't invent your own message queue facility. Use
  Rabbit, ZeroMQ or even Redis.

- For message processing, use text format but not binary one. You are not Google
  with their proto-bufs invented to break down network limitations.

- Writing logs in a file and `tail`ing them via SSH is a mess. Write all the
  logs into (remote) syslog, either your own one or any third-party one. Syslog
  brings huge capabilities with logs processing.

- Never commit to master branch directly (set that option in your Git
  config). Use the simplest Git pipeline you can imagine:

  ~~~
  master -> feature-branch -> commits -> pull request -> review -> merge
  ~~~

- JSON is bad when configuring software: lots of braces, no comments. Take YAML.

### Programming languages

- Prefer those languages that could give you a single compiled file as a result
  of you effort (both binary or bytecode). C-family, Go, Rust, Haskell,
  Java-family are OK. PHP, Python, Ruby, Perl, JavaScript are less OK.

- Take a look at functional languages even you don't have intentions using them
  in your daily work.

- You'd better try not modern languages but rather old ones. Smalltalk, Lisp,
  OCaml would be a great choice.

### Workspace

- Keep you desktop free from unused items.

- The more gadgets you need having around the less you are productive. Ideally,
  you only need your Mac connected to the Internet.

- Use messagers on mobile only except those you need to communicate with your
  customer. On my desktop, I have only Slask running with my customer's
  room. Leave Telegram, Skype, WhatsApp or whatever else on you phone and check
  them rarely.

- Turn off all the notifications on you phone/desktop.

- Try to keep you developing tools simple. Choose text editor like Vim or Emacs
  over IDE. Work with Git from a command line.

- Don't work in open-space. A room with 3-4 people around is OK.

- Don't read the news. Your friends will warn you if something really important
  happens.

### Communication

- Don't argue on Vim vs Emacs, Python vs Ruby and so on. It looks quite
  unprofessional.

- If you full of thoughts you want to share with the world, open a blog or write
  a book. But never argue on them in social networks or messagers.

- Even you are a remote worker, say Hi and Bye every time you've started or
  finished your work day. Your team should know whether are you at the desk or
  not.

- Be always polite.

- When you don't know what to say, keep silence.

- Never afraid saying No.

- Read about negotiations.

- Invest time and money in improving your English skills.

This post is a snapshot of my [Do's And Don'ts][repo] repository. You may always
find updates there.

[repo]:https://github.com/igrishaev/dos-and-donts
