---
layout: post
title:  "English"
permalink: /en/english/
tags: english learn education
lang: en
---

*Disclaimer: this post just shapes my opinion on how to become better in
English. I'm not forcing anyone to follow the way I describe here. There are no
links, promo-codes, Skype contacts, etc to share. I believe you may google them
by yourself. The text given below is rather random advise that I consider to be
useful. I admit it could look a bit weird to you or even wrong, but I don't
care.*

You may notice I've been blogging in English for the last two month. That is not
because I'm so good at it. I'm really far away from reckoning myself as a
confident English speaker. The auditory of this blog are native Russian speakers
in most. So why switching then?

Well, I consider writing in English as additional effort to learn it.

Switching to another language also shifts something in your mind, I bet. It's
not as simple as I wish, though. When write English posts, I often feel I sound
unnatural and the sentence looks artificial. Sometimes, I cannot find a proper
word to ship the idea with all its details.

In that post, I'm going to share a set of advise for those who just started
learning English. I'd like somebody gave me a hand several years ago. These are
just my opinion, though. Following them is up to you.

First, you agree that English is quite important. All the new materials nowadays
appear in English-speaking communities first. Blog posts, articles,
documentation, talks... It would take a long time before they come into Russian-
or any other Cyrillic-speaking group being translated poorly. Why wait for such
long?

Books? I'm feeling sad saying this, but I've stopped buying Russian IT books for
now. Usually they are outdated: up to decade of years might pass since the
original edition was issued. It's OK though when you are interested in
particular academic knowledge or algorithms, O-complexity and everything that
has not been altered for years. For example, there are some quite good books on
C and Pascal in Russian.

But usually our books are made of extremely bad quality. They are issued with
lots of typos and missing spaces in the text. Even MS Word auto-correction could
indicate most of them. The page layout is terrible: thin margins, weird font,
large gaps or tunnels in paragraphs. Paperback's quality is low. Opening such a
book twice breaks it in the middle on two half. Agrrr!

For the last year, I've been reading SICP in Russian edition. It suffers from
all the issues I covered above. I'm finishing it on Kindle nowadays.

Working with foreign customers brings more income. It also makes you more
independent and opens world-wide opportunities. Read my previous post on
[remote working](/remote).

I'm sure I was convincing on telling the reasons you should learn English. Now
we may focus on steps required.

Start with something simple: **enable English language whenever you can.** In
your phone, computer or a tablet. Choose English over your mother tongue in
video games or series. It is really a pleasure to listen to the original voices
rather than localized ones, even made with high quality.

**Attend to English class at work.** I've been learning English in a small group
of 6 at my previous job and it was a great experience. Small groups are great
and the learning process is quite effective. Having few people around means you
may count on having enough time to perform over the group.

No English group in you office? You could always organize it by yourself. I
believe you may find colleagues who also want to learn it. All together, come to
your head department and discuss an option to hire an English teacher at your
office. Don't expect your boss will agree at once. Be ready to share the price
within all the members. It's for your interests all in all, not for your
boss. There is only one man interested in your career. You are.

There is a wide-spreaded myth that **only a native speaker could be a good
teacher. That's totally wrong.** I've been thinking the same way for a long
time. I confess it could prevent you from meeting a really good teacher.

Remember, even a great pronunciation does not make a person a good tutor. A
good one is interested in correcting your mistakes and giving useful
advise. Instead, a good native-speaker who does not have any teaching experience
is not interested in correcting your English. You may say something with
terrible mistakes, but your teacher will just reply "Wow cool!". Such a way of
having lessons does not give a result.

I used to take some lessons from a USA girl. She was a great native English
speaker, no claims to her pronunciation nor accent. But she was talking all the
time. I've been spending my time listening to her bobbing my head and adding "Oh
really?" or "That's cool". That learning period went quite ineffective.

Nowadays, there are lots of cheaters who pretend being a good teacher. Don't let
them fool you. A good teacher asks you about the reason of education first. What
skills do you want to improve? Reading, grammar, speaking, listening? Or prepare
for exams maybe?

A good teacher always asks you to share you thoughts on every fact you
discuss. It's not because he or she is so interested in your opinion. It's to
develop your mind. Matt, my current teacher, asks me all the time regarding
everything we talk about: what do you think on this? What would you do in such a
situation? And even a particular question sounds naive, it could become a
challenge to compose a good answer and share your opinion in a clear strict way.

When learning new words, there is a good trick to remember them. **Open a
exercise book subdivided on thematic sections:** food, cars, computer, home
etc. Then put a particular word you want to fixate in your memory in a proper
section. "Gear" into "cars", "towel" into "house", "ceiling" into "buildings"
and so on. To find a proper word, don't open a translation program
immediately. Try to find out for something from you exercise book first. Write
icons near the words you remember less. But never scribe a translation on your
native language beneath.

When you are at your English class, **do not switch at Russian at all**, even
you need to rest for a minute or say something that is not related to your
class. Even if one is asking "What does the word X mean?", don't give a quick
Russian meaning. Try to compose a phrase that reflects the subject in English
words that you know. It is difficult sometimes, especially with such abstract
terms as truthiness, honor and others. But you ought to try.

**Do not drill English Tense Chart.** One consider that chart as a formula: mix
together "have", "been" and the third form of a verb to get a proper
result. They even pass class tests with such approach. It does not work in real
life, though.

~~~
have + been + V(3) = profit!
~~~

Instead of drilling the whole table, I recommend you to focus on three main
tenses: just past simple, present simple and future simple. That fits your mind
because we also have three terms in Russian as well. For the beginning, try to
explain your thoughts within these three tenses. Keep your phrases simple. It's
always miserable to hear somebody trying to compose a complicated sentence but
stops in a middle of it, breaks the whole line and starts from the
beginning... Please avoid doing that.

You'll definitely need to use more tenses once you have become better in
English. You'll use them to bring additional details into your narrative; to
fixate time boundaries more precisely.

For example, you spent some time on a task and still continue working on it. On
a daily call, you might say: I've been working on that task for 2 days. That's
great because it brings the whole context of what's going on. If you are not
ready for using such a tricky tense, you say: I was working on the task for 2
days. This form is less precise but nevertheless acceptable. Finally, you may
say: I worked on that task yesterday and still continue today. Past simple plus
present simple. A bit redundant but also works.

**What you really should drill is irregular verbs.** A funny fact: there seems
to be more irregular verbs then regular ones. In English, my school teacher used
to joke, for each rule you've got more exceptions then ordinary cases.

A minimal table of irregular verbs takes about three pages of A4 size. The most
used verbs in our daily and business life are irregular ones. Say, write, read,
go, do, make, pay, eat, grow, raise... you will need all of them talking to your
teammates, customers or friends. Just decorate your wall with printed table and
drill. No life-hacks here.

I used to take advise on improving listening skills in my previous post about
remote work. **Start with listening to VOA Learning English videos** on
YouTube. They speak grotesquely slowly and clear and subtitles are rolling
below. Chose any video you like and do the following action in series:

1. watch it reading subtitles.
2. Watch again without reading them (scroll the page a bit down); you should
   recognize all the words clearly.
3. Increase the speed of video to 1.25 (Put a gear button, then "Speed"). Ensure
   you still may recognize all the words.
4. Again, but at 1.5 speed.
5. Finally, but at 2.0 speed. Return back to 1.5 or 1.25 if you miss the
   meaning.

A note: speed change works only in Google Chrome on desktop. Tablets and phones
won't work unfortunately.

The whole process takes usually 15 minutes per a single video. Even less then
you spend on Twitter or being smoking. Do it every morning before starting your
daily job. This exercise is quite productive, I may assure you. Even a week
enough to start recognizing words in English songs. A month later you can
understand most of spoken English as well.

**Read classical English literature. Indeed, not technical.** Classical
literature keeps its own secret: the language there is quite complicated and
well structured. For example, after reading SICP I switched to 1984 by George
Orwell. That is totally different English that I have never seen before! The
phrases composed in a such precise way. The text is full of adjectives and nouns
that bring particular meaning.

But the main benefit here you start filling the structure of the
language. Reading classical books brings huge advantages. Matt, my English
teacher, highly appreciates my choice.

When you finish your English classes, you might still have troubles speaking to
your customers. Don't think you have wasted your time though. In a middle of
your daily calls, **try to find a chance to practice your communication
skills**. Personal English teacher would be a great option. As for me, I have 30
minutes lesson every week with Matt. He grew in London and than moved to China
to teach English there. Usually, we discuss various themes such as politics,
art, literature, hobbies and so on.

Finally, don't think one day you'll know English as completely so you may
stop. **You should never stop trying to learn more about English.** Remember at
school, you've been learnt Russian for ten years right? And you still make
mistakes for sure. It's the same with English. Once you started with it, it will
become better and better, but you never should stop. It would be a catastrophe.

Learning English is the same as any learning process in general. Your life has
just expanded to keep and grow a new knowledge. Like programming, math or
something else. The good things never end.

But finally, this article has got ended for now.
