---
layout: post
title:  "Silent software"
permalink: /en/block
categories: blocking ad adblock
lang: en
---

I really value such kind of software that does not interrupt you. It should have
happened to you I believe: you open a notebook when thouthands of notification
balloons appear above the lock screen. Icons are jumping, everything is
blinking. Or you open a program that immediately shows daily tips, asks for
updates and so forth. Once you've closed the last tooltip, you start recalling
what were you about to do with that program.

That was the reason I abandoned Firefox. Every its extension, when updated,
opened a new tab with release notes. So every time I opened a browser I had to
close those tabs I didn't ask to open.

I've been fighting with that as I can for a long time. I turn off all the
notifications on both laptop and mobile phone. I cut unwilling elements with
Adblock and dump those patters into private Git repo. If a website doesn't have
RSS feed I don't use it. I read long texts only with Kindle.

I cut YouTube interface completely to see only a search bar and the video player
by itself. No recommended sidebar or comment feed.

When I open my laptop willing to send a email but some program prevents me from
that (no matter was is a notification or a sound) it's a serious reason to stop
using it. If any site sticks a city selection or email subscription dialog
across the whole screen I close it. No worries, I'll find another one even
better.

A rule of being not interrupted by software as important as a rule of being not
interrupted by other people. Everybody has a right to be alone.

I hope one day that simple thing will occur to those who develop software.
