---
layout: post
title:  "Conceptual languages"
permalink: /en/concept
categories: clojure lisp erlang concept
lang: en
---

This is a short note on what I'm thinking about programming languages.

Briefly, I reckon some languages as being conceptual. In a conceptual language,
every part of it obeys some global idea. This idea forms design of a language,
the way it behaves and develops. If affects libraries, community and ecosystem.

Take Lisp, for example. The idea is, when we store our code as data, it brings
incredible possibilities to process code as data or turn the data into code. No
other languages may offer something like that, only Lisp does.

In Erlang, every task is solved within a cascade of lightweight processes named
actors. Two actors may communicate directly being run on different
servers. Actors do not create Unix threads. They are managed by OTP rather than
operation system.

With Haskell, you've got quite strong and flexible type system. Types are the
most important part of a typical Haskell program. Once it compiles, it will work
for sure.

Clojure, a modern Lisp dialect, provides immutable data structures and powerful
abstractions for concurrency.

Respectively, non-conceptual languages do not have such a global approach. They
try to implement as many features as possible to satisfy every domain: OOP,
anonymous functions (lambdas), lazy evaluation, etc. As a result, we've got
everything but nothing: each part of such a language is not as powerful as its
analogies form those ones I mentioned above.

Take Python, for example. Although it has such basic functional blocks as map,
reduce and lambdas, programming with it in a functional way will be a mess.

Every part of classical Javascript is just ugly.

Java, a language with static type system, allows you to pass Null instead of any
object to end up with NPE exception.

Although conceptual languages are not perfect, they seem to be easier for me to
learn because they have some common rules that could not be broken. Say, in
Haskell, you just do not have plain Null value. In Clojure, you cannot modify a
dictionary, and so on.

They cannot be substituted with other languages. Really, how can you substitute
Lisp or Erlang? There aren't any alternatives for them.

I believe, the future is about conceptual languages. To develop AI or
distributed systems, we need something more sensible than yet another language
with classes and syntactic sugar.

I'm not sure it could be Lisp, but something that borrows most of its features.
